Add assumable ID with Jenkins and chainctl page (#2539)
chainguard-dev/edu: content/chainguard/administration/assumable-ids/identity-examples/jenkins-identity-chainctl/index.md

- [chainctl](https://edu.chainguard.dev/chainguard/chainctl-usage/how-to-install-chainctl/) installed locally.
- Administrative privileges within your Chainguard organization to create IAM identities (`identities.create`); this capability is available to users with [the owner role](https://edu.chainguard.dev/chainguard/administration/iam-organizations/roles-role-bindings/capabilities-reference/#chainguard-role-capabilities).

## Configure Jenkins Credentials

Jenkins needs a way to supply `chainctl` with an API token so it can exchange it for short-lived credentials when a pipeline runs.

In this example, Jenkins mints an OIDC ID token during each build and `chainctl` uses that token to allow the build pipeline to assume your Chainguard identity — no long-lived secrets are required.

> **NOTE**: Why not a “long-lived API token”? Chainguard does not issue general-purpose, long-lived API tokens. This ensures your automation relies only on short-lived, scoped credentials.

### Create an OIDC token credential

> To get started, create an OIDC token with Jenkins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get started, create an OIDC token with Jenkins:
```

1. Log in to the Jenkins UI
2. Navigate to the **Manage Jenkins** page by clicking the settings gear (**⚙**) in the upper-right corner
3. Navigate to the **Credentials** page by clicking **Credentials**
4. In the Domain column, click **(global)**
5. On the **Global credentials (unrestricted)** page, click **Add Credentials**
6. Use the **Kind** dropdown to select **OpenID Connect id token**

> 7. Enter an **ID**, our example uses `jenkins-oidc`. Click **Create**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Enter an **ID**, our example uses `jenkins-oidc`
8. Click **Create**
```
just seems like a separate step :shrug:

## Create a Matching Chainguard Identity

Create an identity that uses your Jenkins OIDC URL. This is typically `https://YOUR_JENKINS/oidc`:

```shell
chainctl iam identities create jenkins-ci \
  --identity-issuer https://YOUR_JENKINS/oidc \
  --subject jenkins \
  --description "Identity for Jenkins builds" \
  --output json
```

> Bind the identity to a role. We chose `registry.pull` for this example, but you should adjust according to your needs. Refer to [Overview of Roles and Role-bindings in Chainguard](https://edu.chainguard.dev/chainguard/administration/iam-organizations/roles-role-bindings/roles-role-bindings/) to learn more.

Reviewer: nice cross linking!

```shell
chainctl iam role-bindings create \
  --identity=jenkins-oidc \
  --role=registry.pull
```

> Next you use this identity in your build pipeline to authenticate to Chainguard

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can now use this identity in your build pipeline to authenticate to Chainguard.
```

## Use the Identity and Create a Token in Your Jenkins Pipeline

> Here is a minimal working example Jenkinsfile that uses what we just created. In this pipeline:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is an example Jenkinsfile that uses what we just created. In this pipeline:
```

idk 3 adjectives just felt like a lot here

> ---

Author: I'm open, but haven't yet done this.

type: "article"
date: 2025-08-27T08:03:42+00:00
lastmod: 2025-08-27T08:03:42+00:00
draft: false
tags: ["Chainguard Containers", "Procedural"]
images: []
weight: 030
---

This guide explains how to configure Jenkins to authenticate with Chainguard using an assumable identity. This example uses `chainctl`, Chainguard's command line tool. If you would like to follow this guide using Terraform, you can review [Use Terraform to Create an Assumable Identity for a Jenkins Pipeline](/chainguard/administration/assumable-ids/identity-examples/jenkins-identity-terraform/).

With this setup, Jenkins jobs can securely push and pull container images from the Chainguard registry without managing static credentials.

## Prerequisites

- A running Jenkins controller or agent with:
    - chainctl installed and available in $PATH.
    - Docker or another container runtime installed.
- Admin access to your Chainguard organization.
- An existing assumable ID created for Jenkins, or permissions to create one.

## Create a Jenkins Assumable ID

Use chainctl to create an identity that Jenkins can use to authenticate:

> ```sh

Reviewer: FYI I may do a mass change from `sh` to `shell` in the coming days.

> chainctl iam identities create \

Reviewer: Off the bat I can't really test this guide, as this command won't work as written:

```
mark@mark-chainguard:~$ chainctl iam identities create  jenkins-ci   --description "Identity for Jenkins builds"   --output json
                                    
   ✔ Selected folder chainguard.edu.
{"error":"issuer or issuer pattern is required"}
```

Reviewer: I think this procedure might be a more complicated than when the jenkins doc was first written. Jenkins doesn't seem to have oidc by default

  --name jenkins-ci \
  --description "Identity for Jenkins builds" \
  --output json
```

Note the returned identity ID. This guide uses `iam-1234567890` for an example.

## Allow Jenkins to Assume the Identity

Bind the new identity to your Chainguard organization’s default role or a more restrictive one:

```sh
chainctl iam roles bindings create \

>   --role chainguard:member \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  --role chainguard:member \
```

At a glance I don't think this will work. Roles don't look like this: https://edu.chainguard.dev/chainguard/administration/iam-organizations/roles-role-bindings/capabilities-reference/#built-in-roles-summary

Jenkins does not come with OIDC functionality by default, but it is available in the **Open ID Connect Provider** plugin that you may need to install. Refer to https://plugins.jenkins.io/oidc-provider/ for more information about the plugin.

### Create an OIDC token credential

In the Jenkins UI, go to Manage Jenkins > Credentials > (Global) and from here select **Add Credentials**.

Use the **Kind** dropdown to select **OpenID Connect id token**.

Enter an **ID**, our example uses `jenkins-oidc`.

### Create a Matching Chainguard Identity

The Jenkins OIDC token’s issuer is typically `https://YOUR_JENKINS/oidc`.

Create an identity that uses your Jenkins OIDC URL.

```shell
chainctl iam identities create jenkins-ci \
  --identity-issuer https://YOUR_JENKINS/oidc \
  --subject jenkins \
  --description "Identity for Jenkins builds" \
  --output json
```

Bind a role to the identity.

```shell
chainctl iam role-bindings create \
  --identity=jenkins-oidc \
  --role=registry.pull
```

Now you are ready to use the token.

## Use the token in your Pipeline

Here is a minimal working example Jenkinsfile that uses what we just created.

```groovy

> pipeline {

Author: Are you suggesting replacing the "Pull image" stage with this?

```
        stage('oidc-test') {
            steps {
                    sh '''
                        wget -O chainctl "https://dl.enforce.dev/chainctl/latest/chainctl_linux_\$(uname -m)"
                        chmod +x chainctl
                        ./chainctl auth login --identity 45a0c61ea6fd977f050c5fb9ac06a69eed764595/11899d4efde0f403
                        ./chainctl iam orgs ls -o table
                    '''
            }
 ```
 
 I'm willing to do something like that. I like the pull image as it is because by the time the build pipeline reaches it all the identity stuff should be taken care of. I just wanted something super simple as an example. Check out what I added surrounding and explaining the current example and see what you think after the existing is explained.

> pipeline {

Author: oh, I totally missed that point! Yeah, I'll adjust it to use the user's org's repo. Makes perfect sense.
